Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
TOPOLM: BRAIN-LIKE SPATIO-FUNCTIONAL ORGANI-
ZATION IN A TOPOGRAPHIC LANGUAGE MODEL
Neil Rathi∗,1,2
, Johannes Mehrer∗,1
, Badr AlKhamissi1
,
Taha Binhuraib3
, Nicholas M. Blauch4
,
Martin Schrimpf1,†
1
EPFL, 2
Stanford University, 3
Georgia Institute of Technology, 4
Harvard University
ABSTRACT
Neurons in the brain are spatially organized such that neighbors on tissue often
exhibit similar response profiles. In the human language system, experimental
studies have observed clusters for syntactic and semantic categories, but the mech-
anisms underlying this functional organization remain unclear. Here, building
on work from the vision literature, we develop TopoLM, a transformer language
model with an explicit two-dimensional spatial representation of model units. By
combining a next-token prediction objective with a spatial smoothness loss, rep-
resentations in this model assemble into clusters that correspond to semantically
interpretable groupings of text and closely match the functional organization in
the brain’s language system. TopoLM successfully predicts the emergence of a
spatially organized cortical language system as well as the organization of func-
tional clusters selective for fine-grained linguistic features empirically observed in
human cortex. Our results suggest that the functional organization of the human
language system is driven by a unified spatial objective, and provide a functionally
and spatially aligned model of language processing in the brain.1
1 INTRODUCTION
Artificial neural network (ANN) models of language have recently been shown to accurately predict
neural activity in the human language system (Schrimpf et al., 2021; Caucheteux & King, 2022;
Goldstein et al., 2022). When presented with the same text input, the unit activity at internal layers
of especially transformer-based models (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019) is strikingly
similar to the internal activity measured experimentally in human cortex. The most powerful models
predict even close to 100% of the explainable variance of neural responses to sentences in some brain
datasets (Schrimpf et al., 2021). However, while there is a strong alignment to the brain’s functional
responses, a crucial element of cortex is entirely lacking from today’s language models: the spatial
arrangement of neurons on the cortical surface.
In recent models of the visual system, the introduction of topography has led to ANNs that begin to
match brain activity functionally as well as spatially (Lee et al., 2020; Margalit et al., 2024; Keller
et al., 2021; Blauch et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023). These models provide a principle for understanding
the development of spatial organization in the brain, in the form of minimizing wiring cost, such that
neurons with similar response profiles tend to cluster together. These clusters resemble the spatio-
functional organization in the early cortex with orientation preferences such as pinwheels (Hubel &
Wiesel, 1962; 1968; Maunsell & Newsome, 1987; Felleman & Van Essen, 1991), and in higher-level
visual regions with category-selective regions such as face patches (Kanwisher et al., 1997; Haxby
et al., 2001; Tsao et al., 2003; 2006; 2008; Freiwald et al., 2009).
The topography of the human language system on the other hand lacks a comprehensive compu-
tational explanation. Neuroscience experiments suggest both a macro-organization at the level of
a distributed cortical network that selectively responds to linguistic processing (Fedorenko et al.,
2010; 2011; 2024; Blank et al., 2014), as well as a micro-organization into clusters that correspond
∗
Equal contribution by NR and JM. †
Correspondence: martin.schrimpf@epfl.ch
1
Code available at https://github.com/epflneuroailab/topolm.
1
